---
layout: post
title: Science and the treatment of serious illnesses
excerpt: My cancer will not wait for IRB review. My treatment should not wait either.
modified: 2016-02-23
tags: [ cancer, common rule, science]
comments: true
---

*Note: This is a edited version of my submission to the U.S. Department of
 Health and Human Services (HHS) call for public comment on changes to the
 Common Rule, which governs research on human subjects in the US*

In April of 2015, at the age of 29, I was diagnosed with advanced EGFR+ lung
cancer. Although this condition is rare in a person like me, younger, athletic,
never smoker, I am tragically not alone. Hundreds of young adults like me will
be diagnosed with incurable advanced lung cancer in the US. Many multiples of
that number will be diagnosed with diseases like mine that are not very
treatable and fatal.

Recently, my cancer has recurred on first line EGFR inhibitor therapy. As I
consider the next available treatments, it is clear that none are particularly
good options. A next generation EGFR inhibitor will probably only buy me another
7 months to a year. There are no targeted therapies in line after
that. Traditional chemotherapy is not only very toxic, but not very effective
for lung cancer. To my oncologist and me, the best treatment option would be a
combination of targeted therapies, a new treatment that no patient has ever
received before.

For me, research on clinical subjects are not an abstract quest for greater
understanding. The advancement of science is my only hope to stay alive. For me,
research and science are treatment for my deadly disease.

Thus I have a few major concerns about the Common Rule:

## Speed up the IRB review process so that patients can access lifesaving clinical trials

A primary tenant of the Common Rule is an Institutional Review Board (IRB)
weighing that the risk and benefit to a participant of a research study are
proportionate. Yet how qualified is a committee to make this decision? Are they
more qualified to assess benefit than my doctor, who has devoted an entire
career to studying a disease, and has become a world expert? Is the committee
more qualified to assess risk than me, someone who has studied my disease
literally like my life depends on it, and will have to live or die with the
consequences of enrolling in a clinical trial?

Is it the responsibility of the committee to consider the potential risk and
benefit for every individual participant? Does the committee consider the
benefit, in terms of life years gained, of discovering a durable treatment for
someone who is 30 with advanced cancer is greater than someone who is 70, the
average age of a lung cancer patient? That the body of a 30 year old is more
able to withstand drug induced toxicities, lowering the risk? That cancer in
younger adults tends to be more aggressive, but aggressive cancers also tend to
be the most responsive to treatment? And that younger lung cancer patients are
far more likely to have molecularly targetable mutations in their tumor?

The IRB cannot and does not take these considerations into account.  Committees
in general tend to be conservative. In reality, these committees try to reduce
the risk of the study doing harm to the participant to zero. They often overlook
that the benefit to the participant and society is also minimal to none.

The only way to reduce the treatment risk to zero, is to provide no treatment at
all. This is what is occurring in clinical research. The focus is so much on
protecting the patient from the study, that protecting the patient from the
disease, and protecting society from the disease, is completely
disregarded. This drive to reduce the risk to the participant has led to the
vast expansion of scientific understanding of the molecular basis cancer with
very little translated to the clinic, and very little change in clinical
outcomes.

We do not lack the knowledge. We do not lack drugs. We do not lack the courage
or the will. We lack the permission.

In many top research institutions, labs are right next door to the clinic. The
intention is that new findings in the labs can be immediately translated to the
clinic. The fathers and mothers of these great institutions must have never
envisioned the clinical research process today.  If they had, they might have
put an IRB conference room in between the clinic and the lab.

Every new study that is released reveals that cancer is a far more heterogeneous
disease than it was ever considered as in the past. Research for the new age of
cancer treatments will require clinical trials that are as diverse as the
disease itself. How would the Common Rule have to look to support studying
cancer as if every new patient had a ultra rare disease specific to that
patient? That is what science is telling us about cancer. We need to listen and
adjust how we study this disease accordingly. How can we possibly test
personalized therapies for cancer when the disease moves faster than the
scientific process to create the treatment?

Please consider changes to the common rule that aim to protect me from my
cancer, not just from physicians and scientists trying to help me. I strongly
urge the committee to add an exclusion to the lengthy IRB review process for
diseases which are expected to be fatal within one year. At the very least, to
provide transparent, expedited review process which is visible to the public and
guarantees response with some reasonably short timeframe, such as 48 hours.

My cancer will not wait for IRB review. My treatment should not wait either.

## Open access to research data

Although nearly 600,000 Americans will die from cancer this year, it receives a
fraction of the research funding that defense does. This is our political
reality. Every dollar spent on cancer research needs to be stretched. Since the
age of the printing press, we have known that we can multiply scientific impact
by sharing our research. With the internet, we can share not only the distilled
research results and conclusions, we can share the raw data. All publically
funded research should be available in both research paper and raw data format
for free on the internet. Researchers around the world can mine this raw data
for new research. Researchers should be able to freely combine the data from
several studies and draw much stronger conclusions.

## Patient access to their own health data

The findings of research should also be given back to the participants. The
wording of the common rule should not discourage data sharing.

In 2015, I had the opportunity to participate in the Profile research project at
Dana Farber Cancer Institute where I contributed my tumor for next generation
sequencing of 275 cancer related genes.  Five months later, the sequencing data
was ready. In the meantime I had switched oncologists, and hospitals, across
town to Massachusetts General Hospital.

There was one problem - the data was not allowed to be given to me! In order to
pass IRB review, the study could not share the results of the testing with the
patient, for fear that simply having the data could harm the participant. Of
course, they were assuring that I could in no way benefit from the research
either.

Realizing the absurdity of the situation, my oncologist at Dana Farber, within
the protocol of the study, but through a loophole, was able give me the data
verbally over the phone.  I immediately made an electronic document shared the
results with my current oncologist.  We are using this information to guide my
future treatment plans.

## This is a winnable war

Although I have a fatal disease, I remain as I was: a science and technology
optimist. Everything I learn about cancer reinforces my belief that this is a
winnable war. The question is how long it will take, and how many lives will be
lost. Today, we need aggressive, diverse, optimistic clinical research to
translate our lab findings into the clinic. The shackles have to be taken off
our investigators. Patients as participants have to be entrusted to understand
the risks and the benefit. We have to share our research findings with the world
freely online.  And we need to empower patients to act as partners by allowing
them to act as the custodians of the health data they rightfully own.

*Thanks to Amy Li who proofread this post*
